MUST SEE PLACES :
 
The entire city is a visual and aesthetic feast, for the builders of Gwalior were great architects. Take a walk through the streets of the city and you will discover old havelis with exquisitely carved doorways and windows; at almost every street crossing you will find statues of the Scindia family. Museums and art galleries are treasure houses and beautifully maintained palaces give the city its inimitable regal flavour. Sightseeing in Gwalior is a magical trip into the centuries gone by.
 
THE FORT :
Standing on a steep mass of sandstone, Gwalior Fort dominates the city and is its most magnificent monument. It has been a scene of momentous events : imprisonments, battles and jauhars. A steep road winds upwards to the Fort, flanked by statues of Jain tirthankaras, carved into the rock face. The magnificent outer walls of the Fort still stand, two miles in length and 35 feet high, bearing witness to its reputation for being one of the most invincible forts of India. This imposing structure inspired Emperor Babar to describe it "the pearl amongst the fortresses of Hind." Within the fort are some marvels of medieval architecture. The 15th century Gujari Mahal is a monument to the love of Raja Mansingh Tomar for his Gujar queen, Mrignayani. After he had wooed and won her, so the story goes, Mrignayani demanded that he build her a separate palace with a constant water supply from the River Rai, via an aqueduct. The outer structure of the Gujari Mahal has survived in an almost total state of preservation; the interior has been converted into an Archaeological Museum.
 
Also built by Raja Mansingh is the Man Mandir Palace, built between 1486 and 1517. The tiles that once adorned its exterior have not survived, but at the entrance, traces of these still remain. There is a charming frieze here of ducks paddling in turquoise waters. Within, the palace rooms stand bare, stripped of their former glory, mute testimony to the passing of the centuries. Vast chambers with fine stone screens were once the music halls, and behind these screens, the royal ladies would learn music from the great masters of the day. Below, circular dungeons once housed the state prisoners of the Mughals. The Emperor Aurangzeb had his brother, Murad, imprisoned, and later executed, here. Close by is Jauhar Pond, where in the Rajput tradition, the ‘ranis’ committed mass ‘sati’ after their consorts had been defeated in battle. Though the major portions of the Fort were built in the 15th century, references to this gigantic complex can be traced back to 425 AD. Older than the city is the Suraj Kund within the Fort walls, the original pond where Suraj Sen, or Suraj Pal as he was later known, was cured by the Saint Gwalipa.
 
THE SOUND AND LIGHTS SHOW, GWALIOR FORT :
For many decades now, the Fort of Gwalior has slumbered in silence, broken now and then by the patter of curious feet and awed tones.
Come sundown, the deserted Fort is once again left with only memories for company. But now it comes alive every night. Well remembered incidents, and well-loved voices once more echo through its lonely corridors and its dark and sad facade now glows with the colours of life. Red-gold, blue-green lights illuminate every nook and cranny of the superbly tiled 'Man Mandir'. The Gwalior Son-et-Lumiere has begun. The Sound and Light show at the Man Mandir Palace of Gwalior Fort gives you a glimpse into its glorious past. The story of this 'pearl' begins with the sonorous and eloquent narration by Amitabh Bachchan as Gopachal, the sutradhar (narrator).
 
Taking you back in time is the legend of Suraj Sen, the Rajput chieftain who was hunting in the hills and forests around Gwalior. Hopelessly lost and terribly thirsty, Suraj Sen came across the sage Gwalipa who directed him to a pool which would quench his parched throat. After drinking the cool, healing waters of this 'kund', Suraj Sen was cured of a long time ailment-leprosy.
In utter gratitude, according to Gwalipa's wishes, he built a tank and a fort on the site and named the city after this great sage. The Rajputs constructed palaces and temples in the precincts of the fort of which the Sas Bahu ka Mandir and Teli ka Mandir are fine examples. Prolifically carved out of local sandstone, these temples are within the fort itself.
 
For a brief period in history Gwalior stood witness to Turkish invasion and tragic Rajput defeats. Sieges by Mehmood Ghazni and other Muslim kings have been realistically created by the Son-et-Lumiere and 'Jauhar' scenes where Rajput women immolate themselves, are lighting marvels, so life-like they seem to cast a sombre glow over kings who rode out to their last battle.
However, the Rajputs, a fierce and resilient people, did not lose much time in reconquering a lost treasure, and with the Tomar dynasty firmly in the saddle, Gwalior was on the threshold of a great and glorious era. During the reign of Man Singh, the Tomar king, Gwalior saw a flowering of Indian classical music and art. The exquisite 'Man Mandir', Palace of Dreams, was built in his time and so began the most romantic epoch of the Gwalior Fort. Man Singh, a popular and just ruler, married a courageous Gujari village belle, Mrignayani, and the tale of their meeting has been beautifully played out in the Son-et-Lumeire. A constant friend and companion, Mrignayani was the perfect consort. Music was their mutual passion and the legendary Baiju Bawra their common guru.
 
In the Son-et-Lumeire, Pt. Jasraj, Bhimsen Joshi and Kumar Gandharva recreate the spiritual grandeur of the Dhrupad tradition as sung by Baiju and Tansen. An illustrious son of Gwalior, Tansen, one of Akbars 'nine jewels' lies buried in the heart of the city, and his tomb is a splendid example of early Mughal architecture. The Son-et-Lumeire vividly reconstructs Mughal rule, at a time when the fort had become a royal prison. The release of Guru Har Gobing Singh has been graphically described as has been the incredible story attached to it.
Then came to power the last dynasty to rule Gwalior before the post -Independence era-the Marathas under Mahadji Scindia. In between, the fort passed briefly into the hands of the British, Laxmibai of Jhansi and Tatiya Tope. But soon enough the Scindias restored Gwalior to its former glory. The imposing Jai Vilas Palace, situated in the city, below the hill top fort, is proof of the Scindia sway. The late Madho Rao Scindia, the architect of modern Gwalior made it one of the best administered former princely states.
Entry fees: Foreign Adult: Rs. 250/- Foreign child: Rs. 150/- Indian Adult: Rs. 75/- Indian Child: Rs. 40/-
 
TELI KA MANDIR :
The Teli ka Mandir is a 9th century edifice, towering at 100 ft high. This is a Pratihara Vishnu temple of a unique blending of architectural styles. The shape of the roof is distinctively Dravidian, while the decorative embellishments have the typically Indo-Aryan characteristics of Northern India. Also dedicated to Vishnu is the graceful little Sas-Bahu-ka-Mandir, built in 11th century. Another landmark is the historic Gurudwara Data Bandhi Chhod built in the memory of Guru Hargobind Sahib, the 6th Sikh Guru who was imprisoned here by Jehangir for over two years. At the time of his release, he wanted 52 Hindu kings who were his fellow prisoners, released with him. Jehangir was very impressed with the Guru and agreed to his condition. And, finally, within the Fort complex, housed in the erstwhile barracks of the British soldiers, is Gwalior's unique gift to modern India : Scindia School. Acknowledged as one of the finest schools in India, it is only fitting that the country's young citizens receive the best educational grounding surrounded by monuments to a past which is a constant inspiration.
 
JAI VILAS PALACE :
A splendour of a different kind exists in the Jai Vilas Palace, current residence of the Scindia family. Some 35 rooms have been made into the Scindia Museum, and in these rooms, so evocative of a regal lifestyle, the past comes alive. Jai Vilas is an Italianate structure which combines the Tuscan and Corinthian architectural modes. The imposing Darbar Hall has two central chandeliers, weighing a couple of tonnes, and hung only after ten elephants had tested the strength of the roof. Ceilings picked out in gilt, heavy draperies and tapestries, fine Persian carpets, and antique furniture from France and Italy are features of these spacious rooms. Eye-catching treasures include: a silver train with cut-glass wagons which served guests as it chugged around on miniature rails on the tables; a glass cradle from Italy used for the baby Krishna each Janamashtami; silver dinner services and swords that were once worn by Aurangzeb and Shah Jehan.
There are, besides, personal mementoes of the past members of the Scindia family: the jewelled slippers that belonged to Chinkoo Rani, four-poster beds, gifts from practically every country in the world, hunting trophies and portraits. The Scindia Museum offers an unparalleled glimpse into the rich culture and lifestyle of princely India. Open everyday except Wednesday from 10 am to 5.30 pm. Entry fees are Rs. 40/- for Indian and Rs. 300/- for foreign visitors.
 
MONUMENTS :
The father of Hindustani classical music, the great Tansen, one of the ‘nine Jewels’ of Akbar’s court, lies buried in Gwalior. The memorial to this great musician has a pristine simplicity about it, and is built in the early Mughal architectural style. More than a monument, the Tansen’s Tomb is part of Gwalior’s living cultural heritage; it is the venue of a music festival on a national scale held annually in November-December. Leading musicians of the country gather here to give performances during the festival. More opulent than Tansen’s Tomb, is the sandstone mausoleum of the Afghan prince, Ghous Mohammed, also designed on early Mughal lines. Particularly, exquisite are the screens which use the pierced stone technique, as delicate as lace. The earliest freedom fighters, Tatya Tope and the indomitable Rani of Jhansi, are commemorated in memorials in Gwalior. There are cenotaphs at major public crossings, memorials to Scindia kings and queens. Throughout the city, there are these reminders of a proud past, of the great men and women of Gwalior who have their place in the nation’s roll of honour. Located near the Residency at Morar, the newly constructed Sun Temple takes its inspiration from the famous Konark Sun Temple in Orissa.
 
ART GALLERIES AND MUSEUMS :
The Gujari Mahal Archaeological Museum houses rare antiquities, some of them dating back to the 1st century AD. Even though many of these have been defaced by the iconoclastic Mughals, their perfection of form has survived the ravages of time. Particularly worth seeing is the statue of Shalbhanjika from Gyraspur, the tree goddess, epitome of perfection in miniature. The statue is kept in the custody of the museum's curator, and can be seen on request. The museum is open every day except Monday, from 10 am to 5 pm. The Kala Vithika is another treasure house of the arts. It remains closed on Sunday and public holidays. The Municipal Corporation Museum, which is open all days except Mondays, has a very fine natural history section.
The old ancestral house of the legendry Ustad Hafiz Ali Khan has recently been converted into ‘ Sarod Ghar’ – Museum of Music by the Ustad Hafiz Ali Khan Memorial Trust under the patronage and guidance of his great son and sarod maestro Ustad Amzad Ali Khan. The museum has been rebuilt keeping in mind the old traditional architecture of Gwalior and houses in it ancient instruments of the great Indian Masters of yesteryears.
 
GWALIOR ZOO: 
Open every day except friday from 8 am to 6 pm, has some rare species of Indian wildlife kept in natural surroundings.
 